GANITA PRAKASH
Textbook of Mathematics
Grade
7
Part – I
00__PPrreelliimmss..iinndddd 11 44//1122//22002255 1122::5544::1111 PPMM
0774 – Ganita Prakash
ISBN 978-93-5729-983-1
Textbook of Mathematics for Grade 7
First Edition
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
April 2025 Chaitra 1947
 No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the
publisher.
 This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,
be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s
PD 1500T BS
consent, in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
 The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is
incorrect and should be unacceptable.
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2025
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016 Phone : 011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bangaluru 560 085 Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone : 079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114 Phone : 033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021 Phone : 0361-2674869
` 65.00
Publication Team
Head, Publication : M.V. Srinivasan
Division
Chief Editor : Bijnan Sutar
Chief Production : Jahan Lal
Officer (In charge)
Chief Business : Amitabh Kumar
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
Manager
watermark
Assistant Production : Deepak Kumar
Published at the Publication Division Officer
by the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training, Cover and Layout
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016 and
Creative Art Studio and Chetan Sharma
printed at Pushpak Press Pvt. Ltd., 203–204,
DSIDC Complex, Okhla Industrial Area Illustrations
Phase I, New Delhi–110020 Chetan Sharma and Madhusree Basu
00__PPrreelliimmss..iinndddd 22 44//1122//22002255 1122::5544::1111 PPMM
FOREWORD
The National Education Policy 2020 envisages a system of education in the
country that is rooted in an Indian ethos and its civilisational accomplishments
in all fields of knowledge and human endeavour. At the same time, it aims
to prepare students to engage constructively with the opportunities and
challenges of the 21st century. The basis for this aspirational vision has been
well laid out by the National Curriculum Framework for School Education
(NCF-SE) 2023 across curricular areas at all stages. By nurturing students’
inherent abilities across all five planes of human existence (pañchakośhas),
the Foundational and Preparatory Stages set the stage for further learning
at Middle Stage. Spanning Grades 6 to 8, the Middle Stage serves as a critical
three-year bridge between the Preparatory and Secondary Stages.
The NCF-SE 2023, at the Middle Stage, aims to equip students with the
skills that are needed to grow, as they advance in their lives. It endeavours
to enhance their analytical, descriptive, and narrative capabilities, and to
prepare them for the challenges and opportunities that await them. A diverse
curriculum, covering nine subjects ranging from three languages — including
at least two languages native to India — to Science, Mathematics, Social
Science, Art Education, Physical Education and Well-being, and Vocational
Education promotes their holistic development.
Such a transformative learning culture requires certain essential
conditions. One of them is to have appropriate textbooks in different curricular
areas, as these textbooks will play a central role in mediating between content
and pedagogy — a role that will strike a judicious balance between direct
instruction and opportunities for exploration and inquiry. Among the other
conditions, classroom arrangement and teacher preparation are crucial to
establish conceptual connections both within and across curricular areas.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training, on its part, is
committed to providing students with such high-quality textbooks. Various
Curricular Area Groups, which have been constituted for this purpose,
comprising notable subject-experts, pedagogues, and practising teachers as
their members, have made all possible efforts to develop such textbooks.
Ganita Prakash, the textbook of Mathematics for Grade 7, Part I, aligns with
the expectations of NEP 2020 and NCF-SE 2023, with respect to creating a
spark for initiating mathematical thinking. This textbook designed for Grade
7 students, takes forward its journey through the world of mathematics that
started in Grade 6. During this journey the concepts and problems emerge
from daily life situations and so it is expected that students will be able to
relate to them with ease. The book makes efforts to encourage the students
to observe and explore the patterns around them and discover mathematical
concepts on their own. The content attempts to integrate mathematics with
other subject areas such as science, social science with cross-cutting themes
like environmental education, value education, inclusive education, and
Indian Knowledge Systems (IKS). Colourful illustrations and interactive
exercises form the basis of this textbook that would develop a strong
foundation among children in understanding more complex mathematical
00__PPrreelliimmss..iinndddd 33 44//1122//22002255 1122::5544::1111 PPMM
concepts. Throughout the book, stories, conversations and anecdotes have
been incorporated to make abstract mathematical concepts more relatable
and accessible to young learners. Puzzles and innovative problems will not
only engage the students in thoughtfully relating the mathematical concepts
to the world around them and help them in deepening their understanding
of mathematics, but also prepare them to understand the concepts of the
emerging field of computational thinking. The focus is on collaboration and
active engagement through student-centered approach to education.
However, in addition to this textbook, students at this stage should also be
encouraged to explore various other learning resources. School libraries play
a crucial role in making such resources available. Besides, the role of parents
and teachers will also be invaluable in guiding and encouraging students to
do so.
With this, I express my gratitude to all those who have been involved in
the development of this textbook and hope that it will meet the expectations
of all stakeholders. At the same time, I also invite suggestions and feedback
from all its users for further improvement in the coming years.
Dinesh Prasad Saklani
Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational
March 2025 Research and Training
iv
00__PPrreelliimmss..iinndddd 44 44//1122//22002255 1122::5544::1111 PPMM
ABOUT THE BOOK
Mathematics helps students develop not only basic arithmetic skills, but
also the crucial capacities of logical reasoning, creative problem solving,
and clear and precise communication (both oral and written). Mathematical
knowledge also plays a crucial role in understanding concepts in other
school subjects, such as Science and Social Science, and even Arts, Physical
Education, and Vocational Education. Learning Mathematics can also
contribute to the development of capacities for making informed choices and
decisions. Understanding numbers and quantitative arguments is necessary
for effective and meaningful democratic and economic participation.
Mathematics thus has an important role to play in achieving the overall aims
of school education.
Mathematics at the Middle Stage is a major challenge and has to perform
the dual role of being both close to the experience and environment of the
child and being abstract. It must perform the dual role of developing intuition
while also maintaining and emphasising rigour. It must perform the dual
role of enhancing critical and logical thinking while also developing artistry
and creativity and a sense of elegance and aesthetics. Finally, Mathematics
must perform the dual role of providing students plenty of opportunities for
exploration and discovery of concepts on their own while also teaching best-
known methods in the global repertoire of mathematics.
The present textbook has made an attempt to address the above mentioned
goals and challenges of learning mathematics. The writers of this book have
aimed to strike a judicious balance between informal and formal definitions
and methods to develop in students both intuition and rigour. The book also
provides numerous opportunities for student-student and student–teacher
interaction in the classroom to promote active and experiential learning. A
number of questions, puzzles, and interactive exercises are posed throughout
the book to encourage constant exploration. Many of the questions are open-
ended to stimulate in-class discussion.
The first chapter of this book, ‘Large Numbers Around Us’, is an introduction
to the world of lakhs and crores, and millions and billions through engaging
explorations and contexts.
Chapter 2, ‘Arithmetic Expressions’, considers expressions having multiple
operations and discusses how they can be written and read without ambiguity.
Chapter 3, ‘A Peek Beyond the Point’, introduces the usage of the decimal
point and additions and subtractions involving decimal numbers. Chapter
4, ‘Expressions using Letter-Numbers’ builds on the chapter on Arithmetic
Expressions to guide students to take the first steps into the world of algebra.
The fundamental notions of letter-numbers and algebraic expressions are
introduced. Chapter 5, ‘Parallel and Intersecting Lines’, introduces some
fundamental building blocks of geometry and has a balance of engaging
activities like paper folding and rigorous mathematical reasoning. Chapter
6, ‘Number Play’, covers aspects of computational thinking and problem
solving through puzzles and concepts of parity, the Virahāṅka-Fibonacci
sequence, and cryptarithms. Chapter 7, ‘A Tale of Three Intersecting Lines’,
00__PPrreelliimmss..iinndddd 55 44//1122//22002255 1122::5544::1111 PPMM
explores, through construction, some of the striking properties of a triangle
related to the lengths of their sides and angles. Chapter 8, ‘Working with
Fractions’, builds on the students’ understanding of fractions, and explores
the multiplication and division of fractions. The methods and formulas of
the great Indian mathematician Brahmagupta (628 CE) for performing these
operations on fractions is brought alive with fresh examples and interesting
puzzles. In all chapters, an attempt has been made to emphasise connections
with other subjects including Art, History, and Science.
By weaving together storytelling and hands-on activities, we hope that
an immersive learning experience will be created that ignites curiosity and
fosters a love for mathematics. It is hoped that teachers would give children
the opportunity to discuss, play, engage with each other, provide logical
arguments for different ideas, and find loopholes in arguments presented.
This is necessary for the learners to eventually develop the ability to
understand what it means to prove something and also become confident
about underlying concepts. The mathematics classroom should not expect a
blind application of algorithms but should rather encourage children to find
many different ways to solve problems.
As per the NEP 2020, computational thinking has also been gently
introduced through puzzles, games, and interactive exercises that encourage
such thinking. Indian rootedness has also been kept in mind while giving
contexts for different concepts. The contributions of Indian mathematicians
have been given as part of a problem-solving approach to make students
aware of India’s rich mathematical heritage and its global contributions to
mathematics.
The concepts and problems are related to daily life situations. An attempt
has been made to use contexts and materials with which the students are
familiar. Learning material sheets have been given at the back of the book
that may be photocopied and used. At many places, exercises or activities are
given to encourage peer group efforts and discussions. The textbook intends
to address the learning needs of a diverse group of students in the classroom.
We have tried to link concepts learnt in initial chapters with ideas in
subsequent chapters to show the connectedness and unity of mathematics.
We hope that teachers will use this as an opportunity to revise these concepts
in a spiralling way so that children are able to appreciate the entire conceptual
structure of mathematics. We hope that teachers may give more time to
the ideas of fractions, negative numbers and other notions that are new to
students. Many of these are the basis for further learning in mathematics.
Finally, this book aims to be more than just a textbook—it’s a passport
to a world of mathematical discovery and exploration. Whether used in the
classroom or at home, we hope that it may inspire students to embark on
their own mathematical adventures, empowering them to see the beauty
and relevance of mathematics in everything around them. With its engaging
approach and comprehensive coverage of Grade 7 mathematics concepts,
this book hopes and aims to captivate young minds and set them on a lifelong
journey of mathematical discovery.
vi
00__PPrreelliimmss..iinndddd 66 44//1122//22002255 1122::5544::1111 PPMM
I thank again all the writers of and contributors to this textbook for this
important and valuable contribution and service to the nation’s mathematics
teachers, learners and enthusiasts.
We look forward to your comments and suggestions regarding the book
and hope that you will send interesting exercises, activities and tasks that
you develop during the course of teaching and learning, to be included in
future editions.
Ashutosh Wazalwar
Professor, Academic Convener
Department of Education in
Science and Mathematics
National Council of Educational
Research and Training
vii
00__PPrreelliimmss..iinndddd 77 44//1122//22002255 1122::5544::1111 PPMM
NATIONAL SYLLABUS AND
TEACHING LEARNING MATERIAL
COMMITTEE (NSTC)
1. M.C. Pant, Chancellor, National Institute of Educational Planning and
Administration (NIEPA), (Chairperson)
2. Manjul Bhargava, Professor, Princeton University, (Co-Chairperson)
3. Sudha Murty, Acclaimed Writer and Educationist
4. Bibek Debroy, Chairperson, Economic Advisory Council to the Prime
Minister (EAC – PM)
5. Shekhar Mande, Former Director General, CSIR, Distinguished Professor,
Savitribai Phule Pune University, Pune
6. Sujatha Ramdorai, Professor, University of British Columbia, Canada
7. Shankar Mahadevan, Music Maestro, Mumbai
8. U. Vimal Kumar, Director, Prakash Padukone Badminton Academy, Bengaluru
9. Michel Danino, Visiting Professor, IIT – Gandhinagar
10. Surina Rajan, IAS (Retd.), Haryana, Former Director General, HIPA
11. Chamu Krishna Shastri, Chairperson, Bharatiya Bhasha Samiti, Ministry
of Education
12. Sanjeev Sanyal, Member, Economic Advisory Council to the Prime
Minister (EAC – PM)
13. M.D. Srinivas, Chairperson, Centre for Policy Studies, Chennai
14. Gajanan Londhe, Head, Programme Office
15. Rabin Chhetri, Director, SCERT, Sikkim
16. Pratyusa Kumar Mandal, Professor, Department of Education in Social
Sciences, NCERT, New Delhi
17. Dinesh Kumar, Professor, Department of Education in Science and
Mathematics, NCERT, New Delhi
18. Kirti Kapur, Professor, Department of Education in Languages, NCERT,
New Delhi
19. Ranjana Arora, Professor and Head, Department of Curriculum Studies
and Development, NCERT (Member-Secretary)
00__PPrreelliimmss..iinndddd 88 44//1122//22002255 1122::5544::1111 PPMM
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT TEAM
Contributors
Aaloka Kanhere, Project Scientific Officer, Homi Bhabha Center for Science
Education, Mumbai
Amartya Kumar Dutta, Professor, Stat-Math Unit, Indian Statistical Institute
(ISI), Kolkata
Anjali Gupte, Principal (Retd.), Vidya Bhavan Public school, Udaipur
Aparna Lalingakar, Director, Aksharbrahma Consultancy, Pune — (Team Leader)
Ashutosh Kedarnath Wazalwar, Professor, Department of Education in
Science and Mathematics, NCERT, New Delhi — CAG (Mathematics)
Member Coordinator
Geetanjali Phatak, Professor, S. P. College, Pune
H. S. Sharada, TGT, Government High School, HD Kote, Karnataka
K. V. Subrahmanyam, Professor, Chennai Mathematical Institute (CMI), Chennai
Kiran Barve, Faculty, Bhaskaryacharya Partisthan, Pune
Madhavan Mukund, Director, Chennai Mathematical Institute, Chennai —
CAG Chairperson (Mathematics)
Madhu B., Assistant Professor, Regional Institute of Education (RIE), Mysuru
Manjul Bhargava, Professor, Princeton University, and Co-Chairperson, NSTC
Padmapriya Shirali, Former Principal, Sahyadri School KFI, Pune
Patanjali Sharma, Assistant Professor, Regional Institute of Education, (RIE), Ajmer
Rakhi Bannerjee, Associate Professor, Azim Premji University, Bengaluru
Ramchandar Krishnamurthy, Principal, Azim Premji School, Bengaluru
Shivkumar K. M, Senior Consultant, Programme Office, NSTC
Shravan S. K., Senior Consultant, Programme Office, NSTC
Sujatha Ramdorai, Professor, University of British Columbia, Canada,
Member NSTC
V.M. Sholapurkar, Adjunct Professor, Bhaskaryacharya Pratisthan, Pune
Vijayan K., Professor, Department of Curriculum Studies and Development,
NCERT, New Delhi
Reviewers
Anurag Behar, Member, National Curriculum Framework Oversight Committee
K. (Ravi) Subramaniam, Professor (Retd.), Homi Bhabha Centre for Science
Education (HBCSE), Mumbai
00__PPrreelliimmss..iinndddd 99 44//1122//22002255 1122::5544::1111 PPMM
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)
acknowledges the guidance and support of the esteemed Chairperson and
members of the Curricular Area Group (CAG): Mathematics and other concerned
CAGs for their guidelines on cross-cutting themes in developing this textbook.
During the development of this textbook, various workshops were organised
and subject experts in Mathematics from different Institutions were invited.
The NCERT acknowledges the valuable views and inputs given by subject
experts — Shailesh A. Shirali, Director, Teacher Education Program, a Valley
School, KFI; Sadik Ali Shaikh, Head, Department of Mathematics, Maulana
Azad College of Arts, Science and Commerce, Aurangabad, Maharashtra;
Jaspal Kaur, TGT (Maths), School of Excellence, Delhi; Bina Prakash, Senior
PGT Mathematics, Campion School, Bhopal; Mahendra Shankar, Senior
Lecturer (Retd.), NCERT, New Delhi; Shaily Choudhary, TGT Mathematics,
GGSSS, Khajoori Khas, Delhi; Ravi Raxit Sharma, TGT Mathematics, GCMS,
New Seelampur, Delhi; Poonam Arora, PGT Mathematics, Mentor Teacher,
SBV, West Patel Nagar, New Delhi; Shalini Arora Bahri, TGT Maths, SKV No.1,
Narela, Delhi; Sangeeta Solanki, TGT Mathematics, The Heritage School, Delhi;
Sunita Sharma, TGT Mathematics, The Heritage School, Delhi, Rishikesh
Kumar, Assistant Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi; Ishita Mukherjee, CBSE
Resourse Person, Delhi; Tarun Choubisa, Programme Office, NSTC — for
improving the content and pedagogy of the textbook.
The Council acknowledges the efforts of Nidhi M. Shastri and Bhawana
Upadhyay from the Programme Office.
The page number design draws inspiration from the Prime Climb game by
Math For Love. The Council acknowledges Chaitanya Dev and Ramu MS for
providing the pictures of the Decimal Coinage stamps.
The Council acknowledges the academic and administrative support of
Sunita Farkya, Professor and Head, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi.
The Council appreciates the contributions of Sushmita Joshi, Senior
Research Associate; Manju Mhar, Senior Research Associate; Department of
Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT, for providing support in the
development of the textbook.
The contribution of Ilma Nasir, Editor (contractual); Aastha Sharma,
Editorial Assistant (contractual); Adiba Tasneem, Jatinder Kumar and
Talha Faisal Khan, Proofreaders (contractual), Publication Division is also
appreciated. The NCERT gratefully acknowledges the contributions of
Pawan Kumar Barriar, In charge, DTP Cell; Kishore Singhal, Vivek Mandal,
Vipan Kumar Sharma and Bittu Kumar Mahato DTP Operator (contractual),
Publication Division, NCERT for all his efforts in laying out this book.
00__PPrreelliimmss..iinndddd 1100 44//1122//22002255 1122::5544::1111 PPMM
NOTE TO THE TEACHER
We hope that this book, Ganita Prakash, will serve as a strong support and
guide to you in achieving the exciting task that you have before you: that of
passing on the joy of learning the beautiful subject of Mathematics to the next
generation.
This task calls for providing a fertile environment that allows for the
flowering of mathematical thinking in the minds of students. Classrooms,
where students just listen and write down whatever is being told to them or
written on the board, are deficient in the conditions required for learning
mathematics. Instead, classrooms need to be places where students are
engaged in playing with mathematical concepts, finding and discussing
patterns, and developing creative strategies together to solve problems.
Students should also be posing problems to each other and discussing possible
solutions with each other. In fact, these are the very conditions that have
led to the development of the entire field of mathematics so far, and so one
cannot expect students to pick up mathematical thinking and understanding
without these conditions.
Fortunately, it is not difficult to create such conditions in the classroom.
It just requires an interesting question, problem, pattern, or challenge to be
thrown open to the students on a regular basis, and sufficient time to be given
to them to play with, discuss, and work on it as a class or in pairs or groups.
Along with it, an environment that accepts mistakes and acknowledges
their importance in learning needs to be nurtured.
While creating the spark for initiating mathematical thinking in
classrooms is not difficult, sustaining it may be challenging and may involve
efforts from your side. Nevertheless, even if just the first part of throwing
open a question, problem, pattern, or challenge is done at least once or twice
a week, accompanied by sufficient waiting time from your side for students
to play, discuss, and work on it, it can have a great positive impact on how the
students view and approach mathematics.
It should be noted that this positive impact will not happen overnight. That
takes time and depends on various factors such as the number of opportunities
you give for problem solving, your patience, and the encouragement you give
to the students.
To support you in posing problems, all the problems or questions in this
book are marked using the icon . This icon is an indicator of a potential
opportunity to start off a process of problem solving and exploration in the
classroom. You will find some of the problems labelled “Math Talk”. Such
questions can especially be made as topics for classroom discussion.
An owl mascot appears at various points in the textbook to highlight
important mathematical processes, ways of thinking, and problem-solving
approaches. These can be brought out during classroom discussions, both
where the owl is present and also in other similar situations.
00__PPrreelliimmss..iinndddd 1111 44//1122//22002255 1122::5544::1111 PPMM
To develop students’ mathematical thinking and understanding of
concepts, a sufficient number of problems are given. Trying to “cover” all
of them must not happen at the cost of students not getting to spend quality
time on playing with and discussing them.
It is important to understand that the exploratory problems are not
only for promoting problem solving skills; they also serve in strengthening
procedural fluency when children start engaging in exploration.
Efforts must be made in making students independent learners. One
essential aspect required for this is an ability to read and understand
mathematical text. To promote this skill, students should be encouraged to
read the book by themselves and in groups. Give opportunities to them to
interpret what they read and express it to others. This will also address the
big problem that students face in speaking mathematics and interpreting
word problems.
This book contains a number of open-ended problems. It also contains
new treatments of certain concepts. If you are not able to solve them or
follow some of them immediately, it is perfectly okay! Not everyone knows
everything. Along with trying to understand and reflect upon such content,
it will be very useful to take it to the classroom and open it up for discussion.
After the discussion, things that are clear and those that are not yet clear
can be clearly summarised. This process itself can throw a lot of light on the
content.
In these discussions, you can participate as a fellow seeker, and when
students see a teacher seek and think to understand something, it sets a
wonderful example for them.
It is hoped that you and your students will have a great and fruitful time
using this book!
Summary of Key Points
Time for Exploration
1. It is important to routinely pose new problems, questions, patterns, or
challenges to the students and give them sufficient time to play with,
discuss, and work on them, individually and in groups.
2. During this time, an environment that accepts mistakes and
acknowledges their importance in learning needs to be nurtured.
3. There should be a culture where students pose problems to each other
and discuss with each other various ways to approach the problems.
About the Problems in the Book
1. The exploratory problems in the book not only promote problem
solving; they also aim to strengthen procedural fluency when children
start engaging in exploration.
xii
00__PPrreelliimmss..iinndddd 1122 44//1122//22002255 1122::5544::1111 PPMM
2. Trying to ‘cover’ all the problems in the book must not happen at the
cost of students not getting to spend quality time on playing with,
discussing, and solving them.
Reading
1. Encourage students to read the book by themselves and in groups.
2. Give opportunities to them to interpret what they read and to express
it to others.
Right of Not Knowing!
1. It is perfectly okay if some of the content is not understood immediately.
Along with trying to understand and reflect upon such content, it can
also be taken to the classroom and opened up for discussion. After
the discussion, things that are clear and those that are not yet clear
can be clearly summarised. In these discussions, you can participate
as a fellow seeker, and when students see a teacher seek and think to
understand something, it sets a wonderful example for them!
2. Learning is a continual process. Indeed, there is so much in
mathematics that is still not known and requires further exploration!
xiii
00__PPrreelliimmss..iinndddd 1133 44//1122//22002255 1122::5544::1111 PPMM
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
Part III (Articles 12 – 35)
(Subject to certain conditions, some exceptions
and reasonable restrictions)
guarantees these
Fundamental Rights
Right to Equality
• before law and equal protection of laws;
• irrespective of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth;
• of opportunity in public employment;
• by abolition of untouchability and titles.
Right to Freedom
• of expression, assembly, association, movement, residence and profession;
• of certain protections in respect of conviction for offences;
• of protection of life and personal liberty;
• of free and compulsory education for children between the age of six and fourteen years;
• of protection against arrest and detention in certain cases.
Right against Exploitation
• for prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour;
• for prohibition of employment of children in hazardous jobs.
Right to Freedom of Religion
• freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion;
• freedom to manage religious affairs;
• freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular religion;
• freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship in educational
institutions wholly maintained by the State.
Cultural and Educational Rights
• for protection of interests of minorities to conserve their language, script and culture;
• for minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.
Right to Constitutional Remedies
• by issuance of directions or orders or writs by the Supreme Court and High
Courts for enforcement of these Fundamental Rights.
00__PPrreelliimmss..iinndddd 1144 44//1122//22002255 1122::5544::1122 PPMM
A NOTE TO STUDENTS!
To be able to appreciate the art of mathematics, it is not enough to just be a
passive spectator. You need to immerse yourself in its process like a detective
getting into action to solve a mystery.
This is especially required when you see a new question or when a
question arises from your own sense of wonder, or when you come across a
new beautiful pattern. When you encounter these, pause your reading, and
use your creativity to work out the question or understand and appreciate
the pattern.
You will find that some questions are accompanied by their answers. Even
if this is the case, it is worthwhile to work on the problems by yourself or in
a group before you see the answer.
This will enrich your experience of going through the book!
Whenever there are questions coming up, you will see this icon: . This
indicates that it is time for figuring things out!
Sometimes you will find many questions collected together in a single
place under the title ‘Figure it Out’.
Math
Talk
Some questions are marked . These questions are meant to be
discussed and worked out with your friends.
Try
This
Finally, there are questions marked . These questions demand
more creativity to be answered, and therefore will also often be more fun to
answer as a result!
00__PPrreelliimmss..iinndddd 1155 44//1122//22002255 1122::5544::1122 PPMM
Constitution of India
Part IV A (Article 51 A)
Fundamental Duties
It shall be the duty of every citizen of India —
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the
National Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national
struggle for freedom;
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to
do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst
all the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional
or sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity
of women;
(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes,
rivers, wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures;
(h) to develop the scientifi c temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry
and reform;
(i) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
(j) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective
activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour
and achievement;
* (k) who is a parent or guardian, to provide opportunities for education
to his child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of six and
fourteen years.
Note: The Article 51A containing Fundamental Duties was inserted by the Constitution (42nd
Amendment) Act, 1976 (with eff ect from 3 January 1977).
*(k) was inserted by the Constitution (86th Amendment) Act, 2002 (with eff ect from
1 April 2010).
00__PPrreelliimmss..iinndddd 1166 44//1122//22002255 1122::5544::1122 PPMM
CONTENTS
Foreword iii
About the Book v
Note to the Teacher xi
A Note to Students xv
Chapter 1
Large Numbers Around Us 1
Chapter 2
Arithmetic Expressions 24
Chapter 3
A Peek Beyond the Point 46
Chapter 4
Expressions using Letter-Numbers 81
Chapter 5
Parallel and Intersecting Lines 106
Chapter 6
Number Play 127
Chapter 7
A Tale of Three Intersecting Lines 146
Chapter 8
Working with Fractions 173
Learning Material Sheets 200
00__PPrreelliimmss..iinndddd 1177 44//1122//22002255 1122::5544::1122 PPMM
00__PPrreelliimmss..iinndddd 1188 44//1122//22002255 1122::5544::1122 PPMM
